If you've been using Spring Security before,
you'll probably be familiar with the following approach: a login
page prompting the user for their credentials,
by default the username and password.
This is then transmitted to the server in the body
of the request or in the header, like basic authentication over HTTPS hopefully.
Server-side,
the password hash is retrieved from the database and matched against the
hash of the password in the authentication request.
If successful, a session is created with the authenticated user,
and the cookie with the session ID is returned to the client.
All subsequent requests to the server include the session
ID to avoid having to re-authenticate.
Now this is very easy to set up with Spring.
However, this approach has the following challenges.
The user's credentials are handled by the
application and transmitted in plain text,
hence an increase risk of being leaked by some malicious code.
Also,
storing credentials alongside application data exposes them to any
injection vulnerabilities introduced by the development team.
It also doesn't scale very well as the number of applications and services
in your organization grows as each application will need its own often
duplicated authentication and identity management.
Often using different technology stacks requiring maintenance on all
the login registration pages and keeping up to date with security best
practices and updates becomes difficult.
Users also need to maintain multiple sets of credentials.
And since they tend to reuse the same passwords,
your organization security becomes as strong as the weakest link.
In essence,
some sort of single sign-on is required where a user authenticates
once with an identity provider and then gets the keys to access all
the applications they are authorized for and not just within your
organization's boundaries.
If a potential user already has an account with a third party like Google,
how can Google and your application trust each other to allow an
authenticated user with Google to authenticate and share the
identity in Google with your application?
This is very common now, sign in with Google or Facebook, etc.
The user can then agree to share their identity details,
which can then be used by your application to register them
automatically without having to fill out any time-consuming registration
forms or simply authenticate and allow them to access your application
without handling or storing their passwords.
OAuth2, OpenID Connect with JWT are standards that can help solve this.
Additionally, most applications start out as monoliths with a UI,
service, and data access layer.
These are straightforward to implement and secure.
You only need to protect a UI or API entry point.
However, they don't scale well.
There is a limit at how much hardware you can throw
at them to meet increased demand.
Eventually,
you will need to break them up into microservices and scale horizontally.
Now from a security standpoint, you will now have more endpoints to secure.
A request from a user might require multiple hops to complete.
How can you authenticate a request between hops without
sharing the password and without a session?
How can you maintain the identity state of a user
between stateless autonomous services?
And how can you do it without impacting the performance of the application?
In a monolith, latency is low due to interprocess communication.
In a distributed system, there is now the additional cost of the network hop.
Hence, how can you minimize any additional latency of any security checks? Next, we will look at ways how tokens can help address some of these issues.